New blog - Overriding a Kestra Plugin for Custom Requirements: Why & How? (#638)
kestra-io/docs: content/blogs/2023-11-21-custom-plugin.md

But what about customization? What if you need custom plugins with your own embedded logics arising from business needs?

Here again you're not lost: [Kestra](https://github.com/kestra-io/kestra) is composable by design!

Kestra is built on the concept plugins. Every task you use in Kestra is part of a plugin.

In this blog post we will dive into one of our customer plugin creations. They combined [Soda tests](https://www.soda.io/) with their homemade data quality platform that uses queue messaging. We will see that even there, Kestra offers many ways to integrate your custom logic into a dedicated component.

## Plugin Composition : Soda, Kafka and HTTP

The company has a homegrown data quality platform in place that effectively centralizes all data metrics at the broader corporation level.

Meanwhile, some teams have opted to use Soda for conducting analytics tests on Big Query tables. This decision however requires the aggregation of these test metrics into the internal data quality platform, which serves as the hub for all consolidated data. 

> In order to seamlessly integrate Soda tests into this data quality platform, the team made the strategic choice to enhance the existing Kestra plugins.
> Indeed, Kestra already supports the Soda plugin to run tests through the Soda Python library. It also supports consuming and producing messages from Kafka Topic, which the data quality platform relies on to communicate with external services. And finally, it covers anything related to API calls with the HTTP plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to seamlessly integrate Soda tests into this data quality platform, the team decided to build a custom plugin. Even though Kestra already provides a Soda plugin to run tests through the Soda Python library, they needed support for consuming and producing Kafka messages, which their data quality platform relies on to communicate with external services. On top of that, their custom plugin covers functionality to interact with their internal APIs via HTTP.
```

> Creating such a meta-plugin proves to be highly advantageous, especially when dealing with specific try-catch patterns, establishing communication with APIs, and constructing a comprehensive abstraction layer on top of it all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating such a meta-plugin proves to be highly advantageous, especially when dealing with specific try-catch patterns, establishing communication with APIs, and constructing a comprehensive abstraction layer on top of it.
```

> With all the necessary components in place, the team was well-prepared to craft a fully-integrated solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
not needed

## From YAML to Java

> Developers took the smarty way to create this integrated plugin. As Kestra already has all the components to make it work, they first build a Kestra Flow allowing them to run Soda tests and sending corresponding metrics to Kafka topics.
> 
> The result can be seen as follows: a Kestra flow made of different tasks, each of one dealing with its specific feature.
> 
> ![example flow kafka soda](/blogs/2023-11-21-custom-plugin/soda_kafka.jpg)
> 
> This served as a first draft: It’s very easy to use YAML to describe such a pipeline. It’s fast and makes the development feedback loop very short.
> 
> Here the team had two solutions: either templatize the Flow by using inputs and outputs - cooking then a subflow (a flow that can be called by another flow). Or translating every command into proper Java methods.
> 
> They choose the second option. Why ?
> 
> Dealing with custom logics, many API calls, managing messages and topics in queue systems is not straightforward. Using a proper programming language to implement try-catch patterns, business rules or fallback methods is sometimes preferable in the long-term. It eases the maintainability and the extensibility of the integration.
> 
> Moreover, once the Flow was made in YAML it was very easy to translate it to Java. Just take a look at the underlying Java code and you can grasp how one can make the transition from Java to YAML.
> 
> ![java to yaml](/blogs/2023-11-21-custom-plugin/java_to_yaml.png)
> 
> YAML is very good for abstraction. Like a well written complicated mathematical equation that can express clearly and tersely what English couldn’t, YAML brings a semantic clarity that simplifies the process of creating pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The development team chose a stepwise approach to create this integrated plugin. Since Kestra already includes the necessary components, they initially developed a Kestra Flow. This Flow enabled them to execute Soda tests and send the resulting metrics to Kafka topics. The outcome was a Kestra flow composed of various tasks, with each task addressing a specific functionality.

![example flow kafka soda](/blogs/2023-11-21-custom-plugin/soda_kafka.jpg)

This initial version proved that YAML's simplicity accelerates development and shortens the feedback loop.

Faced with a decision, the team considered two options: they could either template the Flow by incorporating inputs and outputs to create a subflow (a flow callable by another flow), or they could convert each command into Java methods.

They opted for the latter. The rationale was that handling custom logic, numerous API calls, and managing messages and topics in queue systems is complex. Implementing try-catch patterns, business rules, or fallback methods in a programming language like Java is often more sustainable in the long run. It enhances the maintainability and extensibility of the integration.

Once the Flow was designed in YAML, converting it to Java was straightforward, as you can see in the image below.

![java to yaml](/blogs/2023-11-21-custom-plugin/java_to_yaml.png)
```

This mathematical analogy seems a little confusing, best to cut it

hope you don't mind rewriting this section a bit as suggested

Author: No it's perfect like suggested, easier to read, thx !

> ## Build components depending of the context
> 
> They are two interesting things here happening:
> 
> 1. You can start by building a component directly from YAML. Creating a subflow that can be called whenever you want with specific parameters (inputs)
> 2. You can write a plugin in Java, letting the end-user work with a proper YAML semantic.
> 
> Depending on the context and the developer background, we can see that creating components in Kestra - reusable pieces of software - is very easy.
> 
> We could also imagine a team only using Python and building subflows calling custom scripts with specific parameters. By creating a Subflow, the team can abstract the whole logic and expose only a few YAML parameters to run the underlying script.
> 
> ![flow subflow](/blogs/2023-11-21-custom-plugin/flow_subflow.jpg)
> 
> ## Conclusion
>  
> Creating reusable components is key in any software development. Thanks to Kestra design, users can create their own building blocks and abstract custom logics easily.
> 
> Whether a team is fluent in Java or only wants to work with Python or any language, Kestra offers ways to create templates (subflow) and let the end-user work with YAML syntax.
> 
> Checkout [this documentation](https://kestra.io/docs/plugin-developer-guide) if you want to start creating your own plugin. We would love to hear from you and learn about your use case, so don’t hesitate to share your ideas on the [Slack community](http://kestra.io/slack).
> 
> Follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/kestra_io) for the latest news. Check the code in our [GitHub repository and give us a star](https://github.com/kestra-io/kestra) if you like the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Building components 

There are two notable approaches here:

1. You can begin by constructing a component directly using YAML. This involves creating a subflow that can be invoked with specific parameters (inputs) whenever needed.
2. Alternatively, you can develop a plugin in Java, which allows the end-user to utilize proper YAML semantics.

Choosing one or the other depends on the situation and the developer's expertise. Both provide straightforward ways to create custom modular components in your workflows.

Alternatively, you could build custom Python scripts (especially using the [embedded VS Code Editor](https://kestra.io/docs/developer-guide/namespace-files)) and use them to build parametrized workflows. By designing a subflow with a Python script task, the team can encapsulate the business logic and expose only a few YAML parameters to execute the underlying script.

![flow subflow](/blogs/2023-11-21-custom-plugin/flow_subflow.jpg)

## Conclusion

In software development, the creation of reusable components is crucial. Kestra's design enables users to easily construct their own modules and abstract custom logic.

Whether a team is proficient in Java, prefers working exclusively with Python, or uses any other language, Kestra facilitates the creation of modular components via custom plugins and subflows, and allows end-users to interact with them using YAML syntax.

If you're interested in developing your own plugin, make sure to check [this documentation](https://kestra.io/docs/plugin-developer-guide). We would love to hear from you and learn about your use case, so don’t hesitate to share your ideas or questions in the [Slack community](http://kestra.io/slack).

Follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/kestra_io) for the latest news. Check the code in our [GitHub repository and give us a star](https://github.com/kestra-io/kestra) if you like the project.
```
